From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes. Oh, weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
handsome. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number four 17 recorded
live Thursday, April 3rd, 2014. This episode
of Hansel minutes is brought
to you by Tellerik empowering
over 1 million developers to create
compelling app experiences across any
screen. online@trik.com and by Franklin
stock net makers of gesture
pack a powerful gesture, recording
and recognition system for Microsoft
connect for windows developers details.
Add gesture, pak.com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Jerry Steele
about teaching children program with
hopscotch. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
talking with Fitzgerald steel. Call
me Jerry. Hi Jerry. Thank
you so much for coming
on the show. I found
your tweet. You're on Twitter
and surprisingly yeah, like everyone
else. And you know, you've
got a modest number of
followers, But you have a
tweet that just went insane.
What happened? I really did
shocked me too. So I
homeschool with my daughter at
least part time. And I
wanted to take the opportunity
to sort of introduce her
to some STEM fields, some
programming in particular, you know,
she probably wouldn't get that
in her, her normal school.
And so we downloaded a
program called hopscotch it's for
the, it's an app for
the iPad. It's a sort
of a, a visual programming
language. There's something similar. It's
called scratch from MIT that
they've been working on for
a few years. If you're
really old like me, you
use turtle logo in the,
you know, in the eighties
and nineties, it's really, you
know, sort of like an
advanced version of that. I
can have a character or
a number of characters and
give them some pretty discreet
commands and make them move
and turn and twist and
things like that. This one's
nice because court's on an
iPad. So it's touch table
and things like that. So
the lesson for that day
was to draw a square,
something pretty simple. Right. And
so I asked her to,
okay, talk to me about
like, if, if, if you
were to explain to me
how to draw a square,
tell me how you would
do it. And so she
said, well, I would draw
a line to the right.
And then I would turn
and draw a line up.
And then I would turn.
And I said, great. Now
make a hopscotch, do that,
make this programming tool, do
that. And it's got a
little character you can say,
okay, I want to download,
take this monkey and make
it go to the right
and then turn 90 degrees.
And so through that process,
you know, she, she was
pretty successful pretty quickly. And
she thought that was really
fun. She really, really opened
her eyes to, Oh, I
can make this thing, do
what I wanted to do.
So after about an hour
playing with it, I had
her write down, you know,
what did you learn about
programming after the last hour?
You know, what do you
remember from that? And she
wrote down a few things
and I took a picture
of it, posted it on
my, on Twitter and just
cause I thought it was
kind of cute. And I
guess everyone else thought it
was cute too. I think
she really kind of hit
the nail on the head
in terms of, you know,
some of the insights she
had about programming people seem
to connect with. Yeah. I
noticed on the first she
says five things I learned
about programming. The first one
here, she says that computers
are really dumb. That is
an insight that I think
that many adults don't have
a lot of people feel
that computer is smarter than
them. They sit down in
front of a computer and
they are intimidated by them.
Yep. But when you have
to actually tell it what
to do, you know, of
course we all know probably
your listeners know, everyone knows
that, you know, computers are
pretty, pretty procedural. You have
to be pretty specific about
what you want it to
do. And I think that
was a, a great thing
for her to learn an
early age that it only
does what it's told to
do. And you have to
be very specific about what
you tell it to do.
Sorry. I don't know if
she meant to do this,
but it seems like she
boldfaced you she's writing this
in pencil on a piece
of paper, but it says
they only know what you
tell it, what to do,
which was extremely insightful. I
don't know if she's that
smart, But yeah, you're right.
Yeah. And then she calls
out that it's, it's very
hard that she uses the
word specific. She immediately recognizes,
like you said, that specificity
and that attention to detail
Required. Yeah. That's absolutely true.
I think when we got
to the point of, you
know, trying to figure out
how far do you have
to turn, right? You can't
turn 85, 70 degrees, you
can't turn 93 degrees. And
so, you know, being able
to be very specific about,
you know, move this far,
turn this much, move this
far again. I think that
was a really good lesson
for her as well. Did
she have a concept already
of like degrees and it
seems pretty sophisticated for a
seven year old, be able
to say, turn 90 degrees
to the right. Or did
she trial and error her
weight into that? She, she
knows a little bit, you
know, so just from different
activities, she know no gym
teachers tell her to turn
180 degrees or her TaeKwonDo
instructor tells her to punch
at a 45 degrees. And
so I don't know that
she really understands what degrees
are, but she's been told
to turn 90 degrees. So
she gets that. And, and,
but the nice thing about
this tool as well is
that it was an opportunity
to really talk through some
of those things, right? So
we got to talk about
drawing. We got to talk
about geometry, we got to
talk about angles. And so
it was really an opportunity
to, you know, not have
a lesson on degrees, not
have a lesson on mathematics,
but just in the course
of trying to do something
to cool, those topics come
up. And it was a
nice teaching point as well.
How long did that take
from the introduction of the
program and tell a square
and then presumably you kept
going until she got bored.
Yeah. The lesson was about
an ah, an hour and
hour, hour and a half
really. I mean, I think
it was probably from, from
startup, this is hopscotch and
this is the characters to
a square on the page.
It was probably about 45
minutes to an hour. The
program's really simple touch base,
you know, events, you know,
so basically it's the format
is when some event happens
here, they set of instructions
to run. Right. So you
can give it into the
events like when the app
starts or when someone taps
on the screen or when,
you know, I think even
like a certain amount of
time when you run into
something. So given some event,
what do I do? And
she got that concept really
quickly when she, you know,
tried something out and it
didn't work. She really quickly
figured out, Oh, I just
go back and I can
tweak this instruction. And then
once you, once you got
it sorta got it. Once
the light bulb came on,
you couldn't stop her. Right.
I mean, we, I mean,
if we didn't have to
go somewhere, she'd probably still
be doing it. You know,
she just really took to
it and just had fun
playing with it. Is it
the touch aspect of things
that made this different than
scratch? Because scratch has been
around for years, I put
together a raspberry PI tried
to get my six year
old and eight year old
into scratch and they just
weren't captured by it. But
somehow hopscotch got them excited.
This one, this one worked
for my daughter. At least
I think that the barrier
to entry is really low
that I think you can
have success really quickly. So
that was really fun. You
know, you know, we had
a particular task that we
had to do and she
went and did it very
fast. I think that was
effective. Another nice thing about
hopscotch is that they make
it very easy to see
what other people in the
community have done. You know,
so right on the homepage
of the app, you can
download some special versions from
people at hopscotch or what
other people in the community.
So you can, so you
can see other people's source
code. And once she did
that, she found one that
drew a picture of the,
the opera house, the Sydney
opera house, right? So here
are the scrap. Here are
the hopscotch instructions for drawing
the Sydney opera house. Well,
she thought that was the
greatest thing in the world.
So now she can see,
Oh, this is how you
make it do water. This
is how you make it
do a solid. And so
she was able to pull
those ideas into her own
project. And now I have
to take a trip to
Australia. How is she still
sticking with it? Is it
something that you think you're
going to put into your
curriculum on a regular basis?
Well, hopefully I want to
keep exposing her to just
different, different STEM subjects, you
know? Right. I don't know
that I'm actually, you know,
that she's going to be
a programmer or anything like
that, but at least I
can, I can expose her
to it. We did this,
the followup lesson we did
was on, on loops, you
know, just sort of that
sort of, that sort of
constructs of repeating a set
of instructions. So I had
her go back and do
the square, but instead of
specifying, you know, line, turn
line, turn, line, turn, this
is what it looks like
if you put it into
it instead of repeat structure
and you know, so just
sort of slowly introducing her
to two different concepts so
far, she hasn't been totally
bored with it. And, you
know, as she is interested,
we'll do more things. We
recently bought a game on
Kickstarter called robot turtles, which
is basically a board game
version of logo, which is
how I learned. Okay. I
assume that, I mean, I
can't tell your, your age,
your generation, but I presume
that we are contemporaries and
you probably remember logo. Oh,
absolutely. I grew up in
the computer programming in the
eighties. That was a what
it did. Yep. I've also
noticed the, not only with
this robot turtles and kind
of this rise of these
kind of basic applications, I'm
also seeing activities in which
you can teach kids programming
in a physical way. For
example, you know, mommy or
daddy is the robot and
they will only do what
you tell them to do,
give them the instructions to
get you a drink. Right,
right. Don't forget to tell
me to stop when I'm
walking to the fridge, that
kind of thing. Yeah. I
think that's exactly kind of
thing. I think it's really
important for children, everyone to
learn, but especially children, when
the, you know, this technology
is going to be so
embedded in their life and
you know, it's, it's nice
to know both, you know,
what it's capable of and
how to best instruct this
technology, how to best interact
with this technology to make
it actually useful for you
to make it, do the
things that you want to
do. And I think that
starts, I think that starts
early. Otherwise it gets to
the point where it's just
a magic box and I
have no control over this
magic box. Well, no, this
is a magic box that
you can make do really
wonderful things. I think the
thing about the way your
daughter wrote it up in
her five points of about
programming was that she really
captured the essence. You actually
phrased it that way in
the tweet. And I think
that probably helped move that
tweet forward because there's nothing
technology specific about what she
said here. She didn't mention
hopscotch. He didn't mention the
iPad. You didn't mention touch.
Right, right. Yeah. Is that
the thing that we think
is missing? We talked about
the STEM gap and I
think that, you know, you
interact with people on a
regular basis and people say
things like, well, I'm not
a computer person. I don't
really, I don't understand computers.
Is it this essence that
they're missing? Or is it
the, the, the details of
the operating of the tool
that they're missing? I think
it's, it's a translation there,
right. Is it's somehow translating
from, you know, the, the
computer does have its own
language, its own way of
spunky thinking its own way
of, of, of interacting with
the world. And so I
think that there is a,
a place for tools like
hopscotch that sort of lower
that, that, that gap, or
sort of bridge that, that
gap make it go closer
from, this is the thing
that I want it to
do. You know, you can
tell a person, you know,
I want you to go
to the fridge and get
me a beer and I
can fill in a lot
of those gaps for you
and the, the languages like
hopscotch, visual programming languages. I
think really like a lot
of the touch interfaces in
general are really kind of
lowering that barrier of entry
and making the computers understand
what we mean. They feel
more of the gaps for
us more, I think as
Talley went about this, this
pro this project, you know,
she just had some success
with that. You told me
that you had some experience
working as a teaching assistant
teaching an engineering programming course.
How did your seven year
old go about this differently
than perhaps maybe a 20
year old would go about
this? I, yeah, that's it.
So I was a, you
know, a TA at my,
my, the university of Iowa
here. So I got to
work with, you know, first
year engineering students, you know,
this is the first time
they've been exposed to programming.
I think we used, you
know, a little bit of
C a little pass scale,
a little Python and things
like that. And I think
the biggest difference was the,
the, the willingness to try
and the willingness to fail.
You know, I think that
I can't count the number
of, you know, grown people
18 year olds that are,
you know, you know, given
like a blank page, you
know, a blank text editor,
what do I do next?
Right. And I got so
frustrated because you know, you've
been in this class for
seven weeks. You need to
tell him, you don't know
how to start. You know,
you know, it C Maine,
right? You'd been, you'd done
this a million times, but
when the instructions kind of
got outside of that place
where, you know, where there
is a specific answer and
it had to be, you
know, be creative and I
don't want to delve into
a whole educational discussion, but
you know, for a lot
of these kids, I think
college is one of the
first times where every question
didn't have a specific answer.
Right. You know, the way
the education has gone, it's
been very sort of convergent,
you know, and you have
to study for this test.
And every question has a
specific answer that need you
to fill in so that
I know that you're ready
to go to the next
thing. Well, now we're at
a phase where the answer
isn't given to you, you've
got to sort of create
the answer. You have to
create the process to get
the answer. And that was
daunting for a lot of
these 18, 19 year old
year old kids. And they
were, and they could not
believe that I wouldn't give
them the answer, but you
know, my daughter didn't have
that same, you know, and
that's actually another reason why
we want to do homeschooling,
you know, cause I don't
want her to go into
that trap. I wanted to
know that the world is
full of interesting questions that
you can use these different
tools to explore. And so,
yeah, I love that fact
that, you know, she saw
that blank screen and of
course there's some nice characters
on, you know, in hopscotch
for her to play with
and interact with. But you
know, she sees this blank
canvas as like an opportunity
to, to color in, you
know, now I don't know
if it's general and not,
you know, the best thing
you can give my daughter
is a blank notebook. You
know, she loves just like
just, I just want to
go and fill this thing
with my ideas and I
don't want that to stop.
And so I'm hoping that
we can keep doing things
that will encourage that behavior.
Yeah. I think that the,
I like the term teaching
kids, how to think. Yeah.
I think that if you,
if you give them very
procedural, like here are the
rules and don't move outside
the, you know, don't color
outside the lines, then there's
danger. And then 20 years
later you don't realize that,
gosh, you know what, I
maybe should've let them color
outside the lines a little
bit. Yeah. I think that's
absolutely right. And I understand
our educational system has a,
a huge problem. They don't
have any money. I have
to move all of these
kids through. And so you
need some sort of procedure
for that, right? You need
to have some sort of
factory for that, but you
know, the world is full
of problems that don't really
fit that model. And as
you know, things get more
complex and more interconnected. I
think we need people. We
need kids that can think
outside those, those lines that
can color outside the lines.
Like you said, I think
programming is a really great
way to instill that kind
of, you know, sort of
cross functional thinking in them.
I haven't figured out how
to express it to my
kids. I don't homeschool. Then
they do go to a
community school. But this idea
of, of you are powerful
is what computer say to
me, the idea that, you
know, I used to think
that it was engineering and
hardware that made you powerful.
And I'm not a, I'm
not an electrical engineer and
I'm not really good with
robots. Although we do include
some of that in the
kids study. But for me,
just the power of plugging
things together, whether it be
transforming data from one format
to another, or even something
basic, like when I star
a tweet, take the picture
and save it on my
hard drive, like basic kind
of workflow like that, almost
like, you know, life macros.
I want, I want a
kid to be able to
push through all of the
things that are standing in
their way to be able
to accomplish what they want
to accomplish. So there's, there's
algorithms there there's data science.
There's also resilience, Resilience, right?
Yeah. Because those things don't,
they, you know, you know,
from writing any macro, it
never works the first time.
Right. You got to kind
of keep trying and keep
trying it and then guess
what the world changes and
you need to change your,
you know, you need to
change your automation. I like
that, that thought that you
said, you know, that they
are, are powerful and you
know, there's never, you know,
not a day goes by
that. You don't read about
some 14 year old kid
that, you know, got some
great Intel science grant because
they just thought outside the
box and they, and they
did something, you know, these
kids can be powerful and
there's never been a better
time for any kid, you
know, any person to have
a great idea to have
that idea go, you know,
I mean, tally, you know,
wrote this little, this, you
know, this little one hour
thing and I took a
picture of it. And now,
you know, that's been shared
by, you know, going on
3000 people now, that's, that's
amazing to me, you know,
that she lives in a
world where she can have
an idea and influence that
many people. And she knows
that she's powerful in that
way, that I'm less worried
about, you know, the box
that the school system is
gonna put her in. Have
you talked to her about
the, how far her thoughts
have traveled? Yes. Yeah. I
have. She's she thinks of
herself like a little minor
celebrity now a little bit,
you know, she's so she's
very cute and she knows
she's very cute. And so
she's kind of opposer. And
so she thinks that she's,
this is just the, you
know, the cat's Meow now.
She doesn't really, I mean,
all she sees is this
a number 2,700 on the
bottom of the picture and
Twitter. I don't know that
she really has a great
concept of what 2,700 people
is, but she just likes
to pretend that she's famous.
That's good enough. That gets
down to empowerment though. She's
like I've influenced people, right?
I mean, the number is
effectively a bajillion, but I
think that what I'm hearing
here is that she now
has the sense of, I
can do stuff. My thoughts
are important and I can
put those out there and
you know, the people, the
public is listening and that's
something that presumably I hope
will stick with her. And
15 year old Italian, 20
year old tally will have
that same sense of power.
Goodness. I hope so. You
know, if that's the only
thing I, I provide her
is, you know, that feeling
that she can, she can
do, she can create and
she can make things happen
in the world that she
wants to happen. Then I
feel like I've done my
job. Yep, absolutely. And I
think that's what, what programming
is, is all about thinking
about things more detailed as
far as algorithms and data
science, when you're homeschooling, or
are you going to start
introducing concepts like that? And
at what age do you
think you'll, you'll get into
those kinds of things? Well,
the nice thing about homeschooling
is that it tends to
be pretty pretty child led,
right? At least the way
that we do it, the
thing that you kind of
do is figure out what
are they interested in and
then build curriculum and, and,
and, you know, activities around
that. Right? So she watched,
there's a movie called Akili
in the B a young
girl from the South of
Los Angeles that learns how
to spell. She does very
well in a, in a,
in a spelling bee. And
so Tanya watch that. And
she says, you know, that
girl's good at spelling. She
did that because she learned
Latin. So I should learn
Latin. Well, great. So we
spent the last six weeks
were working on Latin lessons.
Kidding me. That is fantastic.
She just decided one day.
Yeah. Well, you saw the
movie. Yeah. I'm interested in
Latin. Well, great. So our
next lessons are, you know,
our raw on Latin. And
so that allows you to
springboard to different things. Right.
Well, okay. Let's talk about
Latin. Well, let's talk about,
is there a country called
Latin? No. So within where
was, where did this come
from? Let's talk about different
ways that these words are
used now. So you can
do some vocabulary things. You
can do some geography, you
can do some history. And
so I, I imagine that
those topics will come up
as, you know, as she's
curious about things, right. So
when she's curious about, if
she ever asks, you know,
how many people saw this
tweet, or where did they
all come from? Well, great.
Now that's an opportunity to
talk about data science. That
probably means some homework for
daddy to make it accessible
for her. Right. You know,
to sort of help her,
help her through some things.
But I don't mind. It's
kinda fun for me to
learn too. You know, that
simple question could be like
a week. You just like,
you got me excited because
I'm thinking to myself, all
right. For each cause you
gotta think about, all right,
well, what's the Twitter API.
And for each of the
people in there, you know,
how many of the tweets
were geo tagged. Right. And
you got a whole section
on latitude longitude. And then
could you guys build a
thing that used Google maps
to drop pins? Yes. It
makes me want to homeschool
somebody right away. Well, it's
really funny. Cause I mean,
and they're interested in it
too, because you know, it
goes, you know, whatever they're
interested in and they tend
to keep wanting to learn
about, you know, and so
yeah, so you have to
sort of ride that wave
of their interest without running
into the ground and making
them bored with it. Right.
You know, cause, you know,
after, you know, you're trying
to explain about the details
of the Twitter API, you
know, she's still a seven
year old board. You've got
a high note. Yeah. Right,
right. You have to hide
that in daddy abstraction layer,
Right. Yeah. Even, you know,
nine year old or 10
year old tally might still
feel that way. But I
think there's opportunities to sort
of springboard on the thing
that you're interested in. Okay.
You're talking about my little
ponies now. That's something that
she's interested in. Well, you
know, so there, you know,
it's not main Hatton, it's
Manhattans and let's talk about
New York city, if that kind
of thing. Yeah. I think
that the, the, the resilience
is what we struggle with.
I I've met 20 year
olds that just don't have
the patience to sit down
and solve a problem until
it's done. And I think
teaching professional engineers, the idea
of done means done like
what is done. Yeah. I
think that's a really important
skill. There's there are very
few problems in the world
that are just done. You
know, there are very few
things that you can do
that are just, you know,
I do it one time
and it's done cause the
world changes if nothing else.
Right. So one of the
last points that I hope
that she always remembers, you
know, that she wrote on
this thing is you always
have to check your work.
You know, you always have
to sort of continually to
make sure that, you know,
your, you know, the thing
that you thought was done
is still done. And maybe
if it's not done anymore,
well, then you got to
try it again. When, when
people or friends, friends, and
family heard that you were
teaching her programming, did they
assume, Oh, you're trying to
make her a computer person.
Cause that's what my family
assumes that I'm trying to
turn them into little cubicle
children and they're not going
to be outside. And I
try to explain to my
family that this is about
learning how to think and
about having that sense that
I can do this in
any job. I mean, you
obviously are very familiar with
computers, but that's not necessarily
a part of your job,
right? You're not a programmer,
are you Not anymore? That's
not my, my day job
anymore. I'm, I'm in a,
a marketing capacity now came
here through a user experience
development. And then from that,
you know, it did lots
of front end development and
things like that. So, but
you know, everything is sort
of a, a mishmash, a,
a crossover of physical and
digital. Now I think as
the way the world is
going. And so that really
prepared me for this role
in more of a marketing
role because everything's countable, everything's
digital digital. And I think
that's, you know, the world
that Talia is going to
see to, nobody really gave
us much, much guff about
this. You know, I think
they were just kind of
amazed that, you know, you
know, for a lot of
people, programming is just a
magical box. Right. And, and
I think kinda just how,
how they, how they saw
it, they didn't see it.
You know, they know that
I'm a nerd, a computer
nerd and they figured my
kids, you know, can I
see some computer nerd things
as well? Yeah. I think
that the idea of, of
teaching her Latin or letting
her learn Latin without even
like my first impression as
an adult was like a
Latin, that's probably kind of
hard, but that's really, if
you can tell the child
that is, that it's difficult
or that it's maybe not
a good idea. We'll wait
until you're 12. That's an
immediate turnoff. Like most of
you, wouldn't you say? I
mean, I, I, he went
up to, you know, pick
a random 15 year old
niece. I'm sure you have
one. I have one and
said, let's learn Latin. It'd
be like, Oh, uncle Scott.
Really? That's probably not for
me. Yeah. Child led child
creative too. You know, I,
so my daughter I've tapped
to like my daughter. I
think she's pretty cool. One
of the things that's cool
about her is that she's
got a black belt in
TaeKwonDo. She's been doing that
for a couple of a
couple of years. So she's
got some, some dedicated dedication
DNA inside her. She can
work on things she's pretty
resilient, but this last, this
last winter in her talent
show at school, I was
like, you should do something
to TaeKwonDo. You're really good
at that. She says, no,
I want to do a
dance, honey. You don't really
dance. But you know, and
I tried really hard to
convince her to do the
safe thing. The easy thing,
you know, you do TaeKwonDo
do that. And then all
of a sudden I was
like, you know what? You're
trying to do something new.
You're trying to grow in
a way that you haven't
done. You're trying to create,
you know, express your creativity,
go do that. Right. Why
am I stopping you from
doing the thing that you're
interested in doing? And it
comes back to that power,
right? You know, you want
to, you want them to
feel empowered that they can
shape and change their world.
You know, the world's it's
going to be, you know,
right now the world is
wide open to her. It's
a wide open campus, you
know, it's going to close
in on her at some
point, but I don't need
to be the one that
helps her close. Yep, absolutely.
So if I, you know,
the more tools I can
give her to feel empowered,
whether it's a blank notebook
or hopscotch, or take her
on a trip somewhere, try
trying, I liked your description
of all the different jobs
that you've had. I mean,
with a background in computer
science and an understanding about
how the world fits together,
you've moved seamlessly from marketing
to front end development, you
know, throughout all the entire
spectrum, all with the power
of those skills. Yeah. Well
it's mean problems, you know,
business problems that things that
people are trying to solve
don't really live in a
silo of a particular discipline.
Right. You know what I
mean? It's like, it's, you
can't just have the engineering
part. You know, you can't
just have the business part,
you can't just have the
design parts. They really have
to all fit together. And
what I like about, you
know, now that I look
back and see the things
that I've, I've done, I
have a bit of empathy
for all those different disciplines
and I can kind of
speak all those different languages.
And so when I get,
you know, these different cross
functional teams in a room,
I can do a couple
of things I can help
translate between different things, you
know, create some boundary objects
that help one team of
language map to the other
team's language. And that can
also go to our development
team and say, come on.
I know you can really
do that. I just don't
want to do that. You
know, but look at bootstrap,
they've done a good job.
So maybe, maybe try that.
Exactly. That's fantastic. Well, thank
you so much, Jerry, for
talking to me today. Well,
I really appreciate it. Thank
you very much. It's been
a lot of fun. Can
follow Jerry on twitter@twitter.com slash
F J Steele with an
E. And hopefully we'll see
more pictures of tally programming
and taking over the world
with her programming skills. Thank
you very much. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.